# Start Exploring the SmolNet

Want to start exploring the SmolNet, but haven’t a clue where to start? This page is intended to help set you on the road!

This page covers what equipment you need, and points you at some useful search engines and other starting points.

=> /glossary/ See also this glossary of SmolNet terms you may find useful.

!-=> [web-failure link] What is SmolNet, and why should I care?

# Equipment

## Portals

If you’re just testing the waters, then it’s probably easiest to use your preferred web browser, together with a web portal that can translate between the Web and the SmolNet protocols (Gopher, Gemini, etc).

=> http://portal.mozz.us/ portal.mozz.us (Gemini, Spartan, Gopher...)
=> https://gopherproxy.meulie.net/ gopherproxy.meulie.net (Gopher only)
!- TODO: more portal links. Does geminiprotocol.net have some?

## Clients (Browsers... but not of the Web)

Dedicated clients. For when you’re ready to get serious, or if you want to log into gemcaps.

=> ../why-client/ Why would you use a client?

Here are a handful of links to clients you might try:
!include clients.gmi

# Starting Points (Link Garden)

Now that you know how to get around, here are some ideas on where you might start!

## Search Engines

Searching for content about something? Try one of these!
(Unlike Google, these won’t understand questions - be sure your search includes the actual words that should be in the found pages (and no other words))

=> gemini://kennedy.gemi.dev/ Kennedy: Search Gemini Space
=> gemini://tlgs.one “Totally Legit” Gemini Search (for Geminispace)
=> gopher://gopher.floodgap.com/1/v2/ Floodgap/Veronica 2 (for Gopherspace)

## Cities and Tildespaces

Servers with personal sites for a multitude of different users. Like GeoCities of old!

=> gemini://tilde.team/ Tilde Team - Gemini
=> gopher://tilde.team/1/ Tilde Team - Gopher
=> gopher://sdf.org/1/ The Super Dimension Fortress (SDF) - Gopher
=> gemini://tilde.team/~khuxkm/leo/ khuxkm’s LEO

## Bulletin Boards (BBS)

Servers where you can post and read content on a variety of topics.

=> gemini://bbs.geminispace.org/ GeminiSpace BBS
=> gemini://station.martinrue.com/ Station

## Aggregators

Aggregators check for the existence of new log entries, to gather them all in one feed. It's a great way to discover other sites, and some clients can use them to “subscribe” to updates.

=> gemini://antenna.michaelnordmeyer.com/ Antenna Aggregator (Gemini)
=> gopher://i-logout.cz/1/bongusta
=> gemini://cosmos.skyjake.fi/view.gmi Cosmos (Gemini)
A Super-Aggregator that automatically threads posts that refer to other posts

## Games, and Gaming Spaces

=> gemini://astrobotany.mozz.us/ Astrobotany (Care for your digital flowers, and participate in a community)
=> gemini://gemini.thegonz.net/ “Things” at TheGonz.net (scroll to the “Games” section)
=> gopher://mozz.us:7006/1/ Text Adventures at Mozz.us (Gopher)
=> gemini://sggs.thegonz.net/ Simple Gemini Game Server (Shogi, Go, Connect4, ...)

## Other “Starting Point” Guides!

Excellent starting-point guides that, of course, I only discovered after completing most of the content for this capsule.

=> gemini://skyjake.fi/lagrange/getting_started.gmi skyjake’s Getting Started (on Gemini(/Lagrange))
=> gemini://geminiquickst.art/ GeminiQuickst.art

## Protocol Details

=> /rfcs/rfc1436.txt The Gopher Protocol (RFC 1436)
=> gemini://geminiprotocol.net The Gemini Project (Gemini Protocol & the Gemtext format)
=> gemini://transjovian.org/titan/The%20Titan%20Specification The Titan Protocol Specification (served on the same port as Gemini protocol, alongside it)
=> spartan://spartan.mozz.us/ The Spartan Protocol (extremely Gemini-like, but no TLS)
=> nex://nightfall.city/nex/info/ The Nex Protocol (a straightforwardly simple, extremely Gopher-like protocol)
=> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/zzo38/scorpion/trunk/Specification The Scorpion Protocol (another SmolNet protocol you may encounter)

!include license.gmi
