``` ascii-art logo (font)
						    the.web-is.fail
 _   _                        _            _           __      _ _ 
| |_| |_  ___     __ __ _____| |__   ___  (_)___      / _|__ _(_) |
|  _| ' \/ -_)  _ \ V  V / -_) '_ \ |___| | (_-<  _  |  _/ _` | | |
 \__|_||_\___| (_) \_/\_/\___|_.__/       |_/__/ (_) |_| \__,_|_|_|

		``the dash is in the middle''
```


# The Web Has Failed Us

Don't get me wrong—Web technologies such as JavaScript, WebAssembly, HTML5 Canvas, and Web Audio, have placed tremendous power in the hands of website authors, and with them, some truly amazing, awe-inspiring applications have been built and deployed on the Web.

...But that's exactly the problem. Because, while Web technology has enabled the creation of some very awesome things, that same technology allows site creators to also do some decidedly un-awesome things, too.

And just maybe, like me, you're becoming more than a little bit tired of
* The barrage of “Accept/Manage Your Cookies” boxes
* Beginning to read an article, only to suddenly have a paywall blocking your view
* Ads plastered absolutely everywhere you look
* Sites that actively inhibit you from sharing links to their competitors' sites
* The “doom scroll” and other techniques designed to stimulate addictive behaviors that keep you engaged on their platforms
* Feed and search algorithms that are less efficient at actually getting you the content you want, so that you spend more time scrolling around amongst the ads
* Pages that start blaring sound at you with no forewarning, the moment you interact with them
* Absolutely everything begging, pleading, cheating, and manipulating you into spending your attention anywhere but where you wanted to
* Non-existent privacy, where marketers and data miners know more about you than even you do

Maybe you, too, are beginning to feel that your forays into the Web are draining your mental energy and your focus, drained by dribs and drabs at each encounter of the various obstacles and impediments that have become the standard price you pay, for the privilege to take part in the bounties of the Internet.

Of course, a site author can simply choose to forego these things. Not use cookies, adhere to a strictly text-oriented, undistracted, unobtrusive style. The problem is, as a user, there's no way to know whether a site will be one that extracts that mental tax, or one that doesn't.

And, even once you've identified that a website has been constructed in a friendly manner, you have no way of knowing that any links found on that website, will also be to friendly sites.

And even if a website author has staunchly refused to provide any links to un-friendly sites, there's nothing stoppoing any of those sites from _becoming_ unfriendly at a later date.

# Enter the SmolNet

The small internet, affectionately dubbed SmolNet, is a series of sites, built not on the Web technologies of HTTP(S) and HTML, but on protocols and text formats that are deliberately simple and “unpowerful”. They don't do any of those bothersome things mentioned above, because they are literally incapable of supporting them. In fact, the primary SmolNet protocols only really support two kinds of content, at their core: text, and links!

Not only that, but these protocols provide no way for either the server or the client to send each other anything but “I want resource X,” and “Okay, here is resource X.” There is no metadata sent, except what the type of the content is, no HTTP Headers or any kind of equivalent, and the protocols are designed for it to be impractical-to-impossible for anyone to try to add such things to the protocol later on.

As a consequence, not only can you be absolutely certain that the site you are visiting will not unexpectedly annoy or distract you in the ways we just covered, but you can also be sure that any sites linked to will _also_ be simple in nature, provided they are links that also use SmolNet protocols. And, fortunately, many of the clients (~browsers) that speak them, will mark SmolNet links very differently from non-SmolNet ones, so that it's always very obvious if you're about to leave the safety and simplicity guarantees—because your “browser” has marked out the safe and the unsafe paths.

The SmolNet is primarily for people who want to be reading. That is what you'll be doing with the bulk of the content available on the SmolNet—and while you are reading, you will be doing little else, because little else is possible on most pages.

There are games, there is art, there is music, there are “applications”. But the art never loads unless you asked for it, the music never plays unless you clicked for it, and all the apps and games are governed by a simple rule: nothing can ever change in the page you're viewing—once you've loaded the page, the content is stable, until you click a link to reload the page, or to visit another. There is no “dynamic content” on the SmolNet, and that is what prevents much of the annoyances of the modern Web.

=> /anti-user/ Anti-User Practices, Solved by the SmolNet
For more details on anti-user behaviors that the SmolNet saves you from, and how it does so

# Before You Start

Before you get started, you should probably know a couple of things first, so they don't surprise or confuse you.

## No inline hypertext

The simple SmolNet protocols, Gopher and Gemini, are very simple indeed. One of the features you may be the most surprised to find missing, is that there is no hypertext (links) in the middle of otherwise-ordinary text! Links are always found on a separate line by themselves, apart from any non-linked text.

If a line or paragraph starts out being ordinary text, all of the rest of that paragraph will be ordinary text as well. If a line starts out being a link, the whole line will be a link.

You will find that in practice this isn't as cumbersome as it may sound, and it may even be a little bit freeing to have all the links clearly marked, with nothing tempting you to click on things before you're even finished reading a sentence. Or you may find it irritating—either way, it's an inseparable part of surfing the SmolNet.

## No (or little) text formatting

Gopher and Gemini both lack a way to specify that some portion of text should be rendered in bold, or italic, or as any particular kind of font.

Gemini _does_ have a way to specify that a line is a “heading” (section title), or “preformatted text” (typically, displayed in a monospace font). But these formatting notes are still not specific about formatting, beyond these mild clues, and always apply to the entire line/paragraph.

Some sites may occasionally try to insert formatting in the form of terminal escape sequences, which can inject bold, underline, italic, or color into text. However, while some clients can support this, others may render strange characters as part of the text, instead. For this reason, it is generally avoided to do this—the exception is that it is often used as part of displayed “ASCII art” (aka “ANSI art”)

(Does your viewer support ANSI formatting codes? Check the next line!)
```
A [1mbold[0m word, and a [32mgreen[0m one
```

## Understanding Gopher links

With both the HTTP Web protocol, and the Gemini SmolNet protocol, you ask for a resource, and when the server sends you that resource, it will also include information about what _kind_ of resource it is (the "Content-Type").

The Gopher protocol (another SmolNet protocol), does not work this way: the server does not tell you what kind of resource it is, at the time that you are fetching it; instead, the *link* to that resource will contain that information. It is therefore necessary for Gopher _links_ to include information about what kind of thing you will be fetching, _in_ the link.

A typical gopher:// link might look like:

=> gopher://sdf.org/1/phlogs/ gopher://sdf.org/1/phlogs/

See the /1/ in there? That indicates that this is an "index" page, which is the type of Gopher content that can contain lines of either links, or text. The resource itself is /phlogs/.

The /1/ is never actually sent to the Gopher server - it's there for the client (browser) to know how it ought to interpret the resource, once it arrives.

The type indicator always comes between the hostname (sdf.org, here) and the resource selector (/phlogs/). Other common types include 0 (plaintext file), 9 (binary file), and either g or I (GIF, or any other type of image, respectively).

## (Mostly) no auto-loaded images

This has already been mentioned, but any images that might be linked from a page, are generally not loaded automatically. There's nothing technological actually preventing a viewing program (client) from doing so... but the SmolNet protocols do not intend for clients to autoload anything, and so in practice, they don't.

Thus, online art galleries and the like are possible, but you should expect to click on each image individually in order to view them: you won't generally find a page that already has a pageful of images already displayed for you (because most client programs don't support it).

When you click on an image, your client may just load it to display directly in the page view that you're on—or your client may just “follow” the link and show it as a page on its own.

## Logging into Sites/TLS Identities

In general, Gopher sites (often known as "gopherholes"), do not have logins, or any user-specific content. It is not intended for servers to maintain any client state—only to respond to requests and queries.

For Gemini sites (often known as "capsules", or "gemcaps"), logins do exist on some sites, but logging in with a username and password, though commonplace on the Web, is unusual in geminispace. Instead, since Gemini requires TLS-encrypted connections at all times, it is typical for users to identify themselves by using a specific TLS client certificate, often known as “identities”. Many Gemini clients offer the ability to create and manage these.

Just as, if you use an in-browser password manager and try to login using a friend's or a public Web browser, you won't be able to (unless you remember the password—but memorizable passwords are usually insecure!), in the same way, if you try to log into a gemcap on a different browser (perhaps just even on a different device that you own), you'll find that you cannot, unless you first transfer your identity's certificate and private key (never, ever share that to others or to any site!) to the client on the other device.

# Let's Get Started!

=> /getting-started/ Getting Started
How to get started on SmolNet

!include license.gmi
